---
layout: post
title: The Group Ring and the Regular Representation
draft_tag: 
- Representation Theory
---

In the [previous post]({% post_url 2015-02-02-Representation-Theory-Decomposing-Representations%}){:target="_blank"}, we saw how to decompose a given group representation into irreducibles. But we still don't know much about the irreducible representations of a (finite) group. What do they look like? How many are there? And is there even a finite number of irreducible representations?

In this post, we'll construct the [group ring](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_ring){:target="_blank"} of a group. Treating this as a vector space, we get the [regular representation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_representation){:target="_blank"}, which turns out to contain *all* the irreducible representations of $G$!

<!--more-->

## The group ring $FG$

Given a (finite) group $G$ and a field $F$, we can treat each element of $G$ as a basis element of a vector space over $F$. The resulting vector space generated by $g \in G$ is

$$
FG := \left\{\sum_{g\in G} \alpha_g g: \alpha_g \in F \right\}.
$$


Let's do this is Sage with the group $G = D_4$ and the field $F = \mathbb{Q}$:

*(The Sage cells in this post are linked, so things may not work if you don't execute them in order.)*

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
G = DihedralGroup(4)
F = QQ

FG = GroupAlgebra(G,F)

v = FG.an_element()
v
  </script>
</div>

We can view $v \in FG$ as a row vector:

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
v.to_vector()
  </script>
</div>

Here, we're treating each $g \in G$ as a basis element of $FG$

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
for g in G:
    g = FG(g)
    print "{} = {}".format(g.to_vector(),g)
  </script>
</div>

Vectors in $FG$ are added component-wise:

$$
\left(\sum_{g \in G} \alpha_g g\right) + \left(\sum_{g\in G} \beta_g g\right) = \sum_{g \in G} (\alpha_g+\beta_g) g.
$$

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
w = FG.random_element()  
print 'w = {}'.format(w.to_vector())
print 'v + w = {}'.format((w + v).to_vector())
  </script>
</div>

In fact $FG$ is also a  *ring* (called the [**group ring**](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_ring){:target="_blank"}), because we can multiply vectors using the multiplication rule of the group $G$:

$$
\left(\sum_{h \in G} \alpha_h h\right) \left(\sum_{g\in G} \beta_g g\right) = \sum_{h,g \in G} (\alpha_h \beta_g) hg.
$$

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
print 'v * w = {}'.format((w * v).to_vector())
  </script>
</div>

## Multiplication as a linear transformation

We can treat multiplication by $v \in FG$ as a function

$$
\begin{align*}
T_v: FG &\to FG \\
w &\mapsto v*w.
\end{align*}
$$

One can check that $T_v$ is indeed a linear transformation! We can thus represent $T_v$ as a matrix in the basis given above:

<div class="linked">
  <script type="text/x-sage">
for g in G:
    g = FG(g)
    print "v*g = {}".format((v*g).to_vector())

T = matrix([(v*FG(g)).to_vector() for g in G]).transpose()
show(T)
  </script>
</div>









